---
title: "Volumes in Docksal"
---


Let's go over volumes in Docker first. 

In Docker, [volumes](https://docs.docker.com/engine/admin/volumes/volumes/) are used primarily for persisting data 
generated by and used by Docker containers. Docker automatically creates and manages volumes, storing them in a special
location within the host machine's filesystem. There are also different volume plugins, which add support for 
various other data storage backends for volumes.

Mounting an existing folder from the host machine can also be done via volumes using 
[bind mounts](https://docs.docker.com/engine/admin/volumes/bind-mounts/). 

By default, Docksal uses the bind mount approach. 

The VM layer used on macOS/Windows (through VirtualBox or Docker for Mac/Windows) adds some complexity to that, however
that's not something you normally have to worry about. Both Docksal and Docker for Mac/Windows handle that automatically.
 
From the perspective of a container, a local Linux path is mounted regardless of the underlying host OS. 
On Mac, the host filesystem is mounted with NFS, on Windows - using SMB.

Let's take a look at an example.

The host machine is a macOS and the codebase root directory (the "Projects" folder) is `/Users/username/Projects`. 
This directory is mounted with the same path inside the VM: `/Users/username/Projects`. Any path within that directory 
is exactly the same on the host and inside the VM.

When a project stack is started, the project root directory (e.g., `/Users/username/Projects/myproject`) is bind mounted 
into `/var/www` inside the containers. A corresponding line in `docksal.yml` for this would be:

```yml
version: "2.1"

services:
  cli:
    volumes:
      - ${PROJECT_ROOT}:/var/www:rw
```

`${PROJECT_ROOT}` is automatically set to the project's root directory on the host.

The whole mount chain looks like this (drop the last part for Linux hosts).

```
container ==bind mount==> Linux VM ==NFS/SMB mount==> Mac/Windows host   
```


## Named volumes

Instead of using a host path every time we want to mount a volume, we can give the volume a name and refer to it by name: 

```yml
version: "2.1"

services:
  cli:
    volumes:
      # Project root volume
      - project_root:/var/www:rw,nocopy
      # Shared ssh-agent socket
      - docksal_ssh_agent:/.ssh-agent:ro
...

volumes:
  project_root:
    driver: local
    driver_opts:
      type: none
      device: ${PROJECT_ROOT}
      o: bind
  docksal_ssh_agent:
    external: true
```

In the example above, `project_root` and `docksal_ssh_agent` are "named volumes". The first one is a project level one,
while the second one is a global volume and is used by all projects.

See [stacks/volumes-bind.yml](https://github.com/docksal/docksal/blob/master/stacks/volumes-bind.yml).

Defining volumes this way makes it much easier to override volume settings in one place (`volumes` section) vs multiple 
places in the yaml file. We can now swap bind mounting with something else. See below.


## NFS volumes

```yml
version: "2.1"

volumes:
  project_root:
    driver: local
    driver_opts:
      type: nfs
      device: :${PROJECT_ROOT}
      o: addr=${DOCKSAL_HOST_IP},vers=3,nolock,noacl,nocto,noatime,nodiratime,tcp,actimeo=1
  docksal_ssh_agent:
    external: true
```

See [stacks/volumes-nfs.yml](https://github.com/docksal/docksal/blob/master/stacks/volumes-nfs.yml).

This is what the file sharing chain looks like with a NFS volume. 

```
container:/var/www ==bind mount==> project_root ==> Linux:project_root ==NFS==> macOS:PROJECT_ROOT
```

As you can see, containers mount NFS via the host machine and not directly. This setup method only makes sense on macOS 
with Docker for Mac, for testing and performance comparison purposes.  

### Using NFS volumes

- Add `DOCKSAL_VOLUMES=nfs` in `.docksal/docksal.env` in a project
- `fin project reset`


## Unison volumes

We can also do more advanced and pretty interesting solutions, like using Unison to synchronize files between the host 
and the `project_root` volume. 

See [stacks/volumes-unison.yml](https://github.com/docksal/docksal/blob/master/stacks/volumes-unison.yml).

Unison volumes make the most sense for Docker for Mac users as an alternative to the (still slow) `osxfs` file sharing.

This is what the file sharing chain looks like with Unison over `osxfs`. 

```
container:/var/www ==bind mount==> project_root <==unison daemon==> Linux:PROJECT_ROOT ==osxfs==> macOS:PROJECT_ROOT
```

`project_root` is a named volume, `PROJECT_ROOT` is a path on the host mounted into the same path in the VM via `osxfs`. 
`unison daemon` does a TWO WAY sync between `PROJECT_ROOT` and `project_root`.

Unlike NFS or SMB, `osxfs` supports `inotify` events, which makes it an ideal option for front-end developers relying on
automatic compilation tools and in-browser live reloading. In the chain above, `inotify` events are not lost and are 
propagated all the way from the macOS host to the container.

The benefits of this setup:

- Full native container file system performance (reads and writes)
- `ionitify` event support
- Low latency (~1s), two way file sync

The downsides:

- Initial sync can take time, especially on large codebases
- Higher disk space usage (double the size of the codebase)
- Additional load from the unison daemon, but nothing compared to the load `osxfs` produces. 

### Using Unison volumes

Unprecedented, native-like FS speed on macOS and Windows (Linux is already native). See [docksal/unison](https://github.com/docksal/unison) for details

- [Install Docksal](http://docs.docksal.io/en/master/getting-started/setup)
- Add `DOCKSAL_VOLUMES=unison` in `.docksal/docksal.env` in a project
- `fin project reset`
- Wait until initial sync finishes.

## osxfs:cached mode with Docker for Mac

Docksal automatically enables the `osxfs:cached` mode on Docker for Mac.

See [stacks/overrides-osxfs.yml](https://github.com/docksal/docksal/blob/master/stacks/overrides-osxfs.yml).
